Add SQL statement support (#8515)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/language/overview.rst

=====================
SQL statement support
=====================

The SQL statement support in Trino can be categorized into a number of topics.
Numerous statements are part of the core engine and therefore available in all

> use cases. On the other hand the details and architecture of the connected data
> sources prevent some SQL functionality.

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
connectors. On the other hand the details and architecture of the connected data
sources may prevent some SQL functionality.
```

Author: Done

For example, if the data source does not support any write operations, Trino can
not implement support for SQL statements like :doc:`/sql/delete`. Similarly if
the underlying system does have any security concepts SQL statements like

> :doc:`/sql/create-role` can not provided by Trino and the connector.

Reviewer: This is technically true - however can mislead people into thinking if their MySQL has users and roles support then Trino can manage them too.

Author: Reworded and clarified

.. _sql-globally-available:

Globally available statements
-----------------------------

The following statements are implemented in the core engine and available with
any connector:

* :doc:`/sql/call`
* :doc:`/sql/deallocate-prepare`
* :doc:`/sql/describe-input`
* :doc:`/sql/describe-output`
* :doc:`/sql/execute`
* :doc:`/sql/explain`
* :doc:`/sql/explain-analyze`
* :doc:`/sql/prepare`
* :doc:`/sql/reset-session`
* :doc:`/sql/set-session`
* :doc:`/sql/set-time-zone`
* :doc:`/sql/show-functions`
* :doc:`/sql/show-session`

> * :doc:`/sql/use`

Reviewer: @electrum Should `VALUES` and `MATCH_RECOGNIZE` be part of this too? After all they are engine concepts and connectors don't participate in them.

Author: They are part of read operations .. since they are both part of SELECT statements and are listed in that section therefore. E.a .. no select support also means no match recognize support.

Reviewer 2: Then we would want to document that connectors support order by, window functions, group by, etc.

Author: well... they are part of the same doc page for select and as such as linked. The values and match_recognize files show up as separate entities in the SQL syntax. If we drop linking to it we should follow up with doc updates on select, values and match_recognize to explain that they all work from the same select ..

connector to connector:

* :doc:`/sql/alter-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-table`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-view`
* :doc:`/sql/comment`
* :doc:`/sql/create-schema`
* CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW
* :doc:`/sql/create-table-as`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-view`
* :doc:`/sql/delete`
* DROP MATERIALIZED VIEW
* :doc:`/sql/drop-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-view`
* :doc:`/sql/insert`
* REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW
* SHOW CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-view`
* :doc:`/sql/update`

.. _sql-security-operations:

Security operations
-------------------

The following statements provide security-related operations to security
configuration, data and meta data exposed by by a connector plugin accessing a
data source. Availability varies widely from connector to connector:

* :doc:`/sql/create-role`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-role`
* :doc:`/sql/grant-roles`
* :doc:`/sql/grant`
* :doc:`/sql/revoke-roles`
* :doc:`/sql/revoke`
* :doc:`/sql/set-role`
* :doc:`/sql/show-grants`
* :doc:`/sql/show-role-grants`
* :doc:`/sql/show-roles`

> Transactions

Author: I wasnt sure .. but if this is correct then we will need to add a transactions section for connectors that support it.

=====================
SQL statement support
=====================

> The SQL statement support in Trino can be categorized into a number of topics.

Reviewer 3: a number of -> several

Author: done

> Numerous statements are part of the core engine and therefore available in all

Reviewer 3: Numerous -> Many

use cases. For example, you can always set session properties or inspect an
explain plan and perform other actions with the :ref:`globally available
statements <sql-globally-available>`.

> On the other hand the details and architecture of the connected data sources may

Reviewer 3: "On the other hand" seems to be a colloquialism that might not make sense to non-native readers

Author: Replaced with "However" ... but I am not too happy with that either. Any other ideas?

prevent some SQL functionality. For example, if the data source does not support

> any write operations, Trino can not implement support for SQL statements like

Reviewer 3: "Trino cannot implement" sounds strange. Maybe more direct

> For example, if the data source does not support write operations, then the DELETE statement cannot be executed against the data source.

:doc:`/sql/delete`.

> Similarly if the underlying system does not have any security concepts, SQL

Reviewer 3: Comma after "similarly"

Author: added

> statements like :doc:`/sql/create-role` can not provided by Trino and the

Reviewer 3: There should be a better way to phrase this

Author: Reworded

connector, or they are simply not implemented in the connector.

The categories of these different topics are related to :ref:`read operations
<sql-read-operations>`, :ref:`write operations <sql-write-operations>`,
:ref:`security operations <sql-security-operations>` and :ref:`transactions
<sql-security-transactions>`.

.. _sql-globally-available:

Globally available statements
-----------------------------

> The following statements are implemented in the core engine and available with

Author: We could also break this up a bit into the following 

* session stuff
* prepared statement stuff
* query/explain stuff 

but I am not sure its worth doing that

* :doc:`/sql/describe-output`
* :doc:`/sql/execute`
* :doc:`/sql/explain`
* :doc:`/sql/explain-analyze`
* :doc:`/sql/prepare`
* :doc:`/sql/reset-session`
* :doc:`/sql/set-session`
* :doc:`/sql/set-time-zone`
* :doc:`/sql/show-functions`
* :doc:`/sql/show-session`
* :doc:`/sql/use`

.. _sql-read-operations:

Read operations
---------------

The following statements provide read access to data and meta data exposed by a
connector accessing a data source. They are available with most connectors:

* :doc:`/sql/select` including:

  * :doc:`/sql/match-recognize`
  * :doc:`/sql/values`

* :doc:`/sql/show-catalogs`
* :doc:`/sql/show-columns`
* :doc:`/sql/show-schemas`
* :doc:`/sql/show-tables`
* :doc:`/sql/show-stats`
* :doc:`/sql/describe`

.. _sql-write-operations:

Write operations
----------------

The following statements provide write access to data and meta data exposed by
by a connector plugin accessing a data source. Availability varies widely from
connector to connector, and details are available with the documentation for
each connector:

* :doc:`/sql/alter-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-table`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-view`
* :doc:`/sql/comment`
* :doc:`/sql/create-schema`

> * CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW

Reviewer 3: Code quotes

Author: Done here and with the others

* :doc:`/sql/create-table-as`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-view`
* :doc:`/sql/delete`
* DROP MATERIALIZED VIEW
* :doc:`/sql/drop-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-view`
* :doc:`/sql/insert`
* REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW
* SHOW CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-view`
* :doc:`/sql/update`

.. _sql-security-operations:

Security operations
-------------------

The following statements provide security-related operations to security
configuration, data and meta data exposed by by a connector plugin accessing a

> data source. Availability varies widely from connector to connector, and details

Reviewer 3: Something like
 
> Most connectors do not support these operations. Connectors that support them will document it explicitly.

(phrasing could use improvement)

Author: I removed the second part and added it to the overall section in the beginning instead so we don't repeat it everywhere.

are available with the documentation for each connector:

* :doc:`/sql/create-role`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-role`
* :doc:`/sql/grant-roles`
* :doc:`/sql/grant`
* :doc:`/sql/revoke-roles`
* :doc:`/sql/revoke`
* :doc:`/sql/set-role`
* :doc:`/sql/show-grants`
* :doc:`/sql/show-role-grants`
* :doc:`/sql/show-roles`

.. _sql-security-transactions:

Transactions
------------

> The following statements manage transactions. Availability varies widely from

Reviewer 3: How about

> Most connectors do not support transactions.

Author: done

connector to connector, and details are available with the documentation for
each connector:

> * :doc:`/sql/call`

Reviewer 3: This is not related to transactions. It is used to execute connector specific procedures, typically for write or metadata operations that cannot be expressed as SQL. See Hive connector for examples.

Author: oops .. its already in the global ones anyway. Removed

=====================
SQL statement support
=====================

The SQL statement support in Trino can be categorized into several topics. Many
statements are part of the core engine and therefore available in all use cases.
For example, you can always set session properties or inspect an explain plan
and perform other actions with the :ref:`globally available statements
<sql-globally-available>`.

> However the details and architecture of the connected data sources may prevent

Reviewer 4: However,

Author: done

> However the details and architecture of the connected data sources may prevent

Reviewer 4: Would prefer "can limit" to "may prevent", the latter sounds like the data source is somehow taking action against the SQL functionality.

Author: done

some SQL functionality. For example, if the data source does not support any

> write operations, then a :doc:`/sql/delete` cannot be executed against the data

Reviewer 4: /sql/delete` statement cannot be executed

Author: done

* :doc:`/sql/show-create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/show-create-view`
* :doc:`/sql/show-grants`
* :doc:`/sql/show-roles`
* :doc:`/sql/show-schemas`
* :doc:`/sql/show-tables`
* :doc:`/sql/show-stats`
* :doc:`/sql/describe`

.. _sql-write-operations:

Write operations
----------------

The following statements provide write access to data and meta data exposed by
by a connector accessing a data source. Availability varies widely from
connector to connector:

.. _sql-write-data:

Data management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* :doc:`/sql/delete`
* :doc:`/sql/insert`
* :doc:`/sql/update`

.. _sql-write-materialized-views:

Materialized views
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* ``CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW``
* ``DROP MATERIALIZED VIEW``
* ``REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW``

.. _sql-write-table-schema:

Table and schema management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* :doc:`/sql/alter-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/comment`
* :doc:`/sql/create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table-as`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-table`

.. _sql-write-views:

Views
^^^^^

* :doc:`/sql/create-view`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-view`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-view`

> 

Reviewer 4: Extra line

Author: removed

.. _sql-security-operations:

Security operations
-------------------

The following statements provide security-related operations to security

> configuration, data and meta data exposed by a connector accessing a data

Reviewer 4: data, and meta

Author: done

source. Most connectors do not support these operations:

Connector roles:

* :doc:`/sql/create-role`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-role`
* :doc:`/sql/grant-roles`
* :doc:`/sql/revoke-roles`
* :doc:`/sql/set-role`
* :doc:`/sql/show-role-grants`

Grants management:

* :doc:`/sql/grant`
* :doc:`/sql/revoke`

.. _sql-security-transactions:

Transactions
------------

The following statements manage transactions. Most connectors do not support
transactions. Details are available with the documentation for each

> connector:

Reviewer 4: "Details are available with the documentation for each connector:"

If we're including this snippet here, we should include it with all the other section introductions that say that support is limited to some connectors. If we can't do that, because not all the connector docs have a list of supported SQL statements yet, then I don't think we should have this line at all until that's the case.

Reviewer 4: You also have a nearly identical sentence above all of these sections at line 25, so you could just remove this from here as redundant.

Author: good point... made it all consistent now
